Hi, my name is Brian Caffo, and
this is the lecture on multiplicity and
multiple comparisons.
So in this lecture we're gonna go fishing.
And as a homework problem, I'd like you to
read this XKCD comic, comic number 882.
And it's really a great description
of multiple comparisons and
so I won't rehash it here cuz it's
a long one, but go read that.
That's part of your homework.
It's pretty funny.
So what is multiple comparisons?
Multiple comparisons is
the idea of repeatedly doing
hypothesis tests until
one comes up significant.
Okay?
And this sounds nefarious, but
it can be often done with
the best of intentions, right?
And multiple comparisons issues
can creep in in unexpected ways.
So to just give you an example
of multiple comparisons,
that's sort of famous in the field that I
work in, is someone took a dead salmon and
put it in a functional magnetic
resonance imaging scanner.
And they ran the pixel by pixel analysis,
actually it's three dimensions so it's
often called a voxel instead of a pixel.
They ran a voxel by voxel analysis and
checked for
a statistical significance
at each voxel of whether or
not brain activation existed, and
they found significant things.
And the reason they found significant
things is because of a lack of
adjustment for multiple comparisons.
And of course, there was no brain
activation because it was a dead salmon.
So multiple comparisons, this basically
just arises from applying many tests and
focusing on the significant ones.
That's the negative aspect
of multiple comparisons, but
basically the idea of multiple comparisons
exists just from doing a lot of tests,
even if all the tests are null,
the fact that you will just get some
rejections by chance, just by randomness.
So this can arise from
fitting too many models,
this can arise from looking at
too many quantities of interest,
like in our fish example they just
simply looked at too many voxels, or
not too many they just didn't
appropriately control for it.
Or I think the nefarious version
of multiple comparisons,
the most nefarious version,
is fishing expeditions.
And that's basically testing hypotheses,
testing everything without a priori
hypotheses and just trying to focus in
on those ones that are just significant.
So that's the most negative
version of multiple comparisons.
You have a large dataset,
you want to explain an outcome.
You look at every variable you have,
every combination of variables
with lots of models, pick out the small
subset of significant ones, and
report them as if you hadn't
looked at all the others.
And I think everyone can agree
that there's some problem
with doing something like that.
But I also want to emphasize,
multiple comparisons is not intrinsically,
in looking at lots of hypothesis tests,
is not intrinsically a bad thing to do.
The bad thing to do is to do a lot of
hypothesis tests and not be up front and
account for the fact that you've
done a lot of hypothesis tests, and
that's basically the point
of this lecture.
And I want to give you
the easiest fix possible.
There is a vast literature on multiple
comparisons, but the easiest fix uses
an inequality that's named after
the mathematician, Bonferroni.
And because it's named
after his inequality,
it's called the Bonferroni correction.
And the easiest way to execute
a Bonferroni correction is if you
have a bunch of P-values,
simply multiply your P-values by the
number of tests that you're performing.
So, for example,
if you perform ten tests and
one of the P-values is 0.01,
then that P-value is now 0.10.
Okay, cuz you've multiplied it by ten.
So the Bonferroni correction is highly
robust and it works in all circumstances.
The only problem is,
is it's quite conservative.
So you can imagine, if you perform
a thousand tests, you're multiplying all
your p values by a thousand, it's unlikely
you're going to get anything significant.
So the result of the Bonferroni correction
is often that it is very conservative,
tends to err on the side of
declaring fewer things significant.
But it's the easiest thing and then if
you want to get into harder versions of
multiple comparisons,
you can look into further reading.
You can read up on things like
false discovery rates and
things like, we actually had a relatively
well-known multiple comparisons paper come
out of this department from the faculty
member named David Duncan, and Duncan's
multiple range test is an example in ANOVA
of multiple comparisons corrections.
But I think all of those are much harder
than the simple Bonferroni correction so
that's what I would go with now.
One thing I would mention about
the Bonferroni correction is that
it doesn't give you any guidance
on what number to multiply by.
So if you do a bunch of tests,
and some are related and another set
are kind of unrelated, they're two groups.
Should you aggregate all of those tests
together, and count, say, if you did ten
tests of this sort, and ten tests of this
sort for a totally different hypothesis.
Do you aggregate all of them together,
and multiply all your p values by 20?
Or you just say, well this is one
separate investigation from this
other separate investigation and so
we multiply these by ten and these by ten.
The Bonferroni correction gives
no guidance on this problem.
The Bonferroni correction doesn't tell
you what is the right number of tests to
multiply by, and
that is an inherent problem.
So the best advice I can give on
that is to be your own critic.
Be a critic of the results
that you have and
include all the tests that you think a
critic of yours would want you to include
as penalizing for
having looked at the data.
Okay, so again, I would just reiterate
there's a vast literature on some other
techniques for
handling multiple comparisons, but again,
the Bonferroni correction is
the simplest and easiest one.
And if you're managing someone
who's done a lot of tests or
looked at a lot of models,
fit a lot of models, the easiest thing to
do is when you're looking at the output.
And you discuss the number of models they
fit and the number of parameters they
looked at, you can just kind of
do a kind of rough calculation,
round it up to the easiest number to
multiply by, and use that correction.